two or three years or something, from Spain. And he
would have a question or some sample material that
he wanted us to analyze. And the last time he
called, they had selected a bentonite to use in
their nuclear waste science and he said this is a
spanish bentonite but it doesn't have the
colloidal properties that your miami bentonite
has and we don't know if we dare use it or not and he
said it and we analyzed it and told him why it wasn't
colloidal it had the chemical properties of
bentonite but it didn't have the physical
properties and the reason was that the tiny little
crystals of clay had not been fully dispersed and
they were present in little little lumps of
actually silt-sized lumps which is still pretty
small And they didn't behave colloidally, and it
should serve their purpose very well. And
actually, we use that example in this book that
we're now putting out. So it turned out to be a
research contribution as well as a... And he, as I
say, was a civil engineer. and other good civil
engineering students. The best, probably the
best one that I should remember from my own
professional point of view is Douglas Darrell
Schultz. Darrell Schultz was from downtown,
small town between here and Houston, German
community down there. And Darryl was in the Corps.
And I used to hire undergraduates and still like to
hire undergraduates to work with us some. And he
worked with us some in the lab when he was in the
Corps and come in and had his uniform on from time to
time. And finally, he decided, well, he'd do his
master's degree. And I told him, that's fine. I
have a friend in Germany. whom I had developed a
working relationship through this book
publishing cycle that I'd gotten into, Udo
Svirtman, and I said, he'd probably be glad to have
you come over and work something with him. And so he
did, and he was the first in our lab to use the magnet
to take iron compounds out of soil. And we knew this
process had been developed, but we hadn't brought
it down to a laboratory scale. He used a magnet over
in engineering, actually, to do that. And Darrell
Schultz then applied and received a von Humboldt
scholarship and went to Germany and worked with my
colleague Schwertmann and got his doctor's
degree there. And he's on the faculty at Purdue
University and has been there for several years
and has been very successful there. And he and I are
co-editors on this last book, which is
gratifying. Of all the students you've had,
reckon what percentage are in academia, what
percentage are in government, what percentage
are out in private industry? They're scattered
throughout the three different areas. I guess
academia would maybe have a slight edge. Some are
consultants. Just last week I called Hugh Durham,
and Hugh got his master's here. He's a South Texas
boy and married a young Greek lady when he was in the
military. And they were here, and his children
were small, and he was pressed by finances and
didn't get a PhD, and went with a clay company in
Georgia. And now he's in Gonzales with the
Southern Clay Products Company, and he's
marketing clay products for them. And I called him
last week and talked to him, and he was in Memphis,
north of Memphis, when I caught him in the car over
there.
For a master's student, he's done well. And down
through the years, could you tell much difference
between the preparation, once they were in your
class, of the engineers, the geoscientists, the
ag people? Was there much difference between how
capable they were to do the work in their course?
They tend to have a better developed background
mathematically. in engineering. And they tend to
have a better background chemically in soil
science. And those are the main differences. And
as time goes on, They blend, but in general, it's
pretty hard for people who never, engineers are
taught chemistry, but they don't use it day to day
like we have to use it. And therefore, that's kind
of a hurdle that they have to gradually work over.
But the beauty of this course, like I had a student
from India who was in civil engineering. He was a
real promoter for the course. He recruited
students from us over there. And he's now, I think,
with a consulting firm. But he was really a spark
plug at whatever he did. And it was because he could
see through this. And our ultimate customer is
really the public. And he was one who saw the full
breadth of that. And he had to do very engineering
type of work when he was here and worked quite a lot
with me mineralogically and with my research
associate. But when he got over there, he had to
apply it in a totally different way to highway
instability and things like that. But he went out
then. to serve in the public. And he's the second
engineer that I've had that had an international
background who went out, the first one went with a
state highway. And these, my point is that we can't
very often get a chance to help much with roads and
foundations because our research is not We're not
tied as closely to that. But these students, they
take this right out into the field. And so that's
among the more gratifying experience I've had
with students, realizing that Texas is plagued
with millions of acres of very reactive clay
soils. And, you know, if you drive the streets of
this community, you know that painfully. Well,
even today I was talking with one of my colleagues
in Extension about how we could do something to
help handle the urban scene, not just the rural
scene, but the urban scene. as to how to better
utilize these soils and stabilize them and get the
water to flow where it should and not where it does.
And being able to work with this diverse group has
permitted us to reach out quite a bit to them. In
these students and their effort, I have the
impression that Asian students are extremely
diligent. Can you generalize about the diligence
of students by their background? Just their
determination, their effort? It is true that the
Asian students do tend to be very diligent. At the
Masters and PhD level, the students in general are
more motivated. So having to prod students is not
our usual circumstance.
Now, there's a lot of difference. I've had not many
students from Japan, although I've had a few, but
I've had some postdocs from Japan. And they are
very methodical, and they can work on the most
ragged problem, and their consistency and
persistence they can deal with. whereas
Americans would probably not have the patience.
But coming up as they have, and as it happens,
Japanese soils are volcanic soils, very
disorderly and very difficult to deal with. They
made progress, and I've had the privilege of
working with three different Japanese. Have you
ever had any... events that obviously showed some
kind of awkwardness between some students
because of their, the history of their countries.
A student from Greece and Turkey working side by
side or Korea and Japan working side, any of that
ever? I've thought about that many times, and
that's really a rare thing. I had a student came in
from South Africa, actually, he was a postdoc
here. And he said when he got here, he said, you
know, it was quite an experience to come from South
Africa and come in through South America. Said we
kind of went from the black to the brown. He said,
that was really a jolt to my wife and I. And he was not
prejudiced. He was a white child. Yes, he was
white. And he was very diligent, very capable,
very efficient. And it wasn't long until Abu
Sinkai from Uganda, who's very African, They were
just exchanging views. And so it's sort of a
mystery to me that people have trouble that they do
when I see these guys working together. What about
any awkwardness of male-female, a Muslim, a woman
from a Muslim background dressing in a fashion
that might not be acceptable back home or
something or other? I don't believe I've had a
Muslim woman. I remember when I went to Saudi
Arabia and I met my friends from over there. They
came out in their white attire. And I just
commented, you know, all this grand welcoming
beginning and all this workshop we were going to
have. They had brought in people from all the
neighboring Arab countries, which I found later
they had to pay their way to get them to come. And I
just said privately at lunch or something, it's a
mysterious thing I've observed here. You all have
such a, Riyadh is growing and thriving, and yet
there are no women. I just don't know how you've
managed all this. They sure didn't come back with
any quick
answers. But even then I could see these young
ladies that they were beginning to educate with
their briefcases and going to the record shops and
that music and things. But I haven't had any, I've
had, now I did have a young woman, now that you
mention that, The poorest country neighbor to
India on the east. It's in the wetlands. I think
it's Bangladesh. She was my class, and she's
Muslim. But she said, when I discussed that type of
thing with her privately, she said, well, when I
first came, I wore my attire one day, but said, you
know, it seemed to be sort of a problem, so I haven't
been wearing it anymore. Her father was a civil
engineer. And they were actually originally from
India, I think, and they were working in that part
of the world. But she was very bright and very
capable and did well in the course. So I was
pleased, because I've always had a particular
empathy for the women in that part of the world.
Have you ever had any student of any sort give you
some kind of hokum kind of excuse that they can't do
something or other because of, or they need
special consideration because of? I had a
sabbatical person from Egypt who was devout, is
devout Muslim. And the thing that he did that I, he
didn't press this on us, but every so many times a
day, he rolled out his mat and did his prayers in the
laboratory. Oh, so he really did. And I made a point
not to go into the laboratory when he was prayer
time for him. But he combined the two. He was highly
motivated in his religion. He worked as hard as any
man I've ever known and did a lot of good work. But he
was the most orthodox person I think I've ever
worked with. Very pleasant, but he drew the line.
All right, this is to the typist. This is not an
editorial note and you don't need to include it in
the typed version. The best excuse I've ever
gotten as an example of goofiness was from an Aggie
who told me that his first day, his freshman
course, his grandfather was really sick and that
he might not make it through the semester. And I
said, you're not teasing? He said, no, it's really
serious. I said, well, gee, I hope it's not
terminal. He said, oh, yeah, yeah, he's probably
not going to make it. I said, well, keep me informed
and we'll try to do the best we can. He was still
serious, or so it looked. And when he got to the
door, he turned his back to me and he said, in fact,
sir, it's almost certain he's going to die the
first day of deer season. So I use that as my best
example ever. All right, now take me through your
research. What were you working on when you got
here? And what were your research efforts and
projects and so forth? It could take a long time. I
don't know how much of that you want.
When I was in Auburn, University in Alabama, we
were defining soils. We were analyzing samples of
soils that had never been analyzed. And we had a new
x-ray machine, and we were just getting these
basic data. And so that was the focus of what we did.
Excuse me a moment. I guess I'll take this off. Or
should I?
When I came to Texas, Kunze had done quite a lot of
characterization of the mineralogy of Texas
soils. He's always done some more, but he had
studied samples of the Houston Black, which is the
state soil, and the Lufkin, which is a local soil,
and the Beaumont, which is an acid soil they grow
rice on. He had done the general mineralogy of
them. reasonably well, and he was very
methodical. He always had a good technician, and
they did things very methodically, and so I had
files of data, and have often gone back and pulled
those out and compared, and that's been very
effective. So I began to look for other things. The
space era and the environmental eras have been
factors that have influenced us. I had a student,
David Carty, who came in as
an undergraduate, and he wanted to do a a problem
with library kind of study on how to contain a
nuclear explosion out of a generating plant. Now,
this is a long way back. We were still way back in the
old State Chemist's Building, and a whole lot of
things have happened in the country since then,
and nobody had witnessed stuff. a nuclear event.
And whenever we made contact, and David did this as
his project, with a nuclear branch of government,
they not only didn't want to share anything with
him, they sort of scolded him for even asking the
question. And he he had the idea that, well,
someday there's going to be a meltdown and if we
study the soils in the area, that we could make a
berm around the site and we could contain whatever
was there if we chose the soils correctly. And this
would be a significant deterrent to the spreading
of radioactive materials. As I say, he did what he
could, but it was an unpopular topic. They didn't
want to talk to him about it. But in the intervening
years, we found out how prophetic his thoughts
were. He was kind of a radical student, in a sense,
talking about this sort of thing. But we know about
Three Mile Island. We know about Chernobyl. And we
know that that kind of information is really good
thinking. And by the way, that young man is a
consultant here in Bryan now. He works out of
Bryan. So he's still pursuing environmental
problems. So we did work. That was not a very
in-depth endeavor, but that was one thing.
Another one that comes to mind that's more novel
than anything else, and that is I had a student who
worked as an undergraduate helping in the lab
part-time, and he wanted to do some research. And
it had happened there had been a young lady who was
from the geography department, and she came in one
day and she had about a dozen samples that she had
picked up while she was touring near Pericatine
Volcano in Mexico.
She said, the crop's doing terrible there. These
people can grow a good crop of corn. What's the
problem? And she said, here are these samples.
Well, you look at them and tell me about it. Well, I
felt very humbled at that point because I didn't
have any idea that I could do much looking at those
samples to tell her why the corn didn't grow well in
Pericotine. But she left them and she told me she
would check back. And so I told this young man who
was working with me, I said, now you want to do a
piece of research, and we're doing soil
mineralogy, would you take the clay out of those 12
samples and we'll x-ray it and see what it is?
He did. And we x-rayed them and it was the poorest
set of x-ray patterns I think I ever saw. Out of the
whole set we had two that had some small peaks on
them. The others were just lines, just jiggle
lines. Those days we had long strip charts. And
that was, well, then came a student from
oceanography, Tom McKee. And Tom really liked to
work with electron microscopes. And that, he came
to me because he thought I could use it for the
electron mic work. And so he took those and looked
at them, and that was before the, I believe it was
the 10th
International Soil Congress in Moscow. And Tom
McKee looked at those little glass particles,
which is mostly what those soils were, volcanic
glass, and found little spots in them which we
realized were hallucite, a particular kind of
clay that forms in many soils and in volcanic soils
particularly. And then we went to the other
instruments, infrared and so on, and
characterized what they were further. And I gave
that paper in Moscow and it's published in the
proceedings of that conference. From that, we had
analyzed some soil from Guatemala. There's an
aggie from Guatemala who used to come here every
year because he had children in school here, and he
would bring some samples with him, and he again
would ask me questions like, I want to know if this
will make good soil for growing tomatoes, which I
wasn't exactly the person that should have been
handling that kind of question. But he would also,
in his position as an alumnus, he would leave me the
samples and he'll say, all right, you send me the
results. And Dr. Bloodworth, that's the only time
that I can remember Dr. Bloodworth saying, would
you like to meet this gentleman and help him out?
And so and so I did. And we had found this one soil
that had a lot of aloesite in it from Guatemala,
volcanic soil. Well, some of it was spherical. And
clays are making up of layers, and there's, if you
distort a layer, it tends to roll and make a
cylinder. And most all the holosite in the world
that we knew about in those days was tubular. And
here we found spheres. And so the clave scientists
from all around wanted to know why spheres. In the
glass from pericotine, we saw these spheres
forming in bubbles at the microscopic level, at
the micron level. And no one has ever refuted that,
and that grew out of the undergraduate student's
inquiry, the lady, the geography student
bringing the sample from Mexico, and then I went
later to the pericotine and sampled the soil again
when I was in there. So that was, those were kind of
isolated parts of research. But those were
projects that you got involved in as a result of the
student. Right. But what were your pet projects
when you got here and how did they, what else, what
did that lead to?
Well, the history of clay mineralogy and soils for
quite a long time was potassium chemistry. We all
know that you've got nitrogen, phosphorus, and
potassium. That's what the gardener puts on and
makes fertilizer. So potassium, there's a lot of
it applied. It's an expensive fertilizer
amendment. And clays have potassium in the
structure in some cases. And so we were always
trying to figure out why some clays held why does
the Houston black clay hold potassium
effectively, or why it releases it? Well,
that work was really the what we were pursuing
whenever I mentioned Frank Hans earlier, that's
the way that turned out up there. That the shortage
of potassium was what they were trying to deal
with, and the soil test would say they needed to
apply soil potassium fertilizer, but the plant
didn't respond that way. And in his work, we found
that, well, there is enough mica in a certain
fraction of that soil that it is releasing some
potassium. And so that correlated with the
available potassium to the plant. And we
published that work. So that was one of my areas of
interest, a subject much worked on by many soil
scientists. What was next?
Well, a lot of things that come to us in research are
kind of coincidental. I was and am interested in
iron oxides, and whenever I got to using the new
microscope here, and growing out of Daryl
Schultz's work to some degree, we had the tools to
deal with iron oxides. And in this regional
project, we want to deal with them. One of the basic
problems with soils is that they may be chemically
controlled reasonably well, but we cannot
physically control them very well. And that is
still a persistent problem, as we mentioned
earlier. And so I wanted to analyze the iron oxides
in some of the soils from the states and the
regional group, as well as in Texas, and see what
what there was about them that made the soil behave
differently when we have quite a lot of iron oxide
in them. The two major aggregating agents in soils
are iron oxides and organic matter. being a
mineralogist, I was looking at the iron oxide.
After all, the red clays of Georgia are rather
well-structured. And many of the red soils of the
southeastern United States, they're rather
well-structured. But the gray soils of Texas are
not very well-structured. And so I began to look at
them. And from that, I realized with the
instrument that we have that While clays in soil,
again, they're layered, they tend to be smooth.
And there's not much friction between layered
structures, graphite, clay, and so on. But these
iron oxides are like little cockleburs or
something, only they're little crystal ends. And
even within the last few weeks, I've had to correct
my Midwestern colleagues who said there are no
crystal faces on iron oxides. They think that
they're disorganized. But only when you magnify
them about a third of a million times or more can you
realize that really they're composed of numerous
little crystal faces that are some micron in size.
That's, one would never know that without good
instrumentation. And so I think that's a
significant finding. And I teach it now. So iron
oxides. I got interested while I was on
sabbatical. There was a young woman, Shirley
Turner, a slightly deformed young lady. sort of a
strange structural deal, but a very good
scientist. And she was working on manganese
oxides, and this was a geology group that I was
associated with, and she did a very nice
dissertation on manganese oxides. So when I came
back from sabbatical, I got a copy of her
dissertation, and then I began to look, and a lot of
these soils in Texas have little black nodules in
them which are manganese oxide. And so I started
characterizing those. And she brought me into
contact with the electron microscopic
techniques for doing that, and which I, of course,
learned, studied there. So in our work with
reclamation, which is, I worked about 10 years
collaboratively with Lloyd Hosner, who's a soil
chemist, and some other people, and had
sabbatical people come in And we worked about how
to convert overburden into soil, and what would be
good and what would be bad. And one of the things
that we found in that was that there are these black
coatings on some of the rock that were exposed by
mining. And we identified that as toterokite,
manganese oxide that was